---
layout: post
title: Discipline daemons
menu: false
categories: [personal]
tags: [discipline]
comments: true
permalink: disciplineDaemons
excerpt: Auto-starting a daemon daily in favor of discipline over motivation.
---

I happened to see this quote some time ago on the internet.

> Fuck motivation. It’s a fickle and and unreliable little dickfuck and isn’t worth your time. Better to cultivate **discipline** than to rely on motivation. <br> 

> Force yourself to do things. Force yourself to get up out of bed and practice. Force yourself to work. Motivation is fleeting and it’s easy to rely on because it requires no concentrated effort to get. Motivation comes to you, and you don’t have to chase after it. <br> 
**Discipline** is reliable, motivation is fleeting. The question isn’t how to keep yourself motivated. It’s **how to train yourself to work without it**. 

Having felt the same way before, that whenever I try to do something new I love - my motivation gets lost after some time and then it gets sidelined to the egdes of daily life, I came to the same conclusion too. **Cultivate discipline**.  

Recently while watching **Mr. Robot** season 1 again, *Elliot* referenced **daemons** - That they don't stop working, they are always active, they seduce, manipulate us to fall into old habits. Any habit in itself is a daemon and they own us. 

Controlling one's daemons isn't possible. But it's possible to *create new ones* - the good ones. It will be slow but it's possible to create them in one's life. 

Thats how I aim to do stuff I like from now on. Not by motivation, but by auto-starting a **daemon** daily. Maybe one day, I will be able to control my daemons.
